.TH DUCKER "1" "January 2017" "Ducker 2.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
Ducker \- search with DuckDuckGo from the command line
.SH SYNOPSIS
Ducker [OPTION]... [KEYWORD]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS "positional arguments:"
.TP
search_str
what you want to search
.SS "optional arguments:"
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-multiple\-search\fR
launch a search for every word given
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-image\-search\fR
search for images
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-video\-search\fR
search for videos
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-website\-search\fR
search for websites
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-no\-javascript\fR
search with DuckDuckGo html interface
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-lite\fR
search with DuckDuckGo lite interface
.TP
\fB\-s\fR N, \fB\-\-start\fR N
start at the Nth result
.TP
\fB\-n\fR N, \fB\-\-count\fR N
show N results (default 8)
.TP
\fB\-c\fR REG, \fB\-\-reg\fR REG
region-specific search e.g. 'ar-es' for Argentina; visit https://duckduckgo.com/params
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-exact\fR
disable automatic spelling correction
.TP
\fB\-C\fR \fB\-\-nocolor\fR
disable color output
.TP
\fB\-colors\fR COLORS
set output colors
.TP
\fB\-t\fR DURATION \fB\-\-time\fR DURATION
time limit search [a (any time), d (past day), w (past week), m (past month)]
.TP
\fB\-\-site\fR SITE
search a site using DuckDuckGo
.TP
\fB\-p\fR PROXY \fB\-\-proxy\fR PROXY
tunnel traffic through an HTTPS proxy (HOST:PORT)
.TP
\fB\-\-noua\fR
disable user agent
.TP
\fB\-\-json\fR
output in JSON format; implies --noprompt
.TP
\fB\-\-np\fR \fB\-\-nopromp\fR
perform search and exit, do not prompt
.TP
\fB\-d\fR \fB\-\-debug\fR
enable debugging
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
show this help message and exit
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
output version information and exit
.SH INTERACTIVE MODE KEYS
.TP
.BI "n, p"
Fetch the next or previous set of search results.
.TP
.BI "index"
Open the result corresponding to index in browser.
.TP
.BI "f"
Jump to the first page.
.TP
.BI o " [index ...]"
Open space-separated result indices in the browser. Open the current search in the browser, if no arguments.
.TP
.BI g " keywords"
Initiate a new DuckDuckGo search for \fIkeywords\fR with original options. This key should be used to search omniprompt keys (including itself) and indices.
.TP
.BI "q, ^D, double Enter"
Exit Ducker.
.TP
.BI "?"
Show help for interactive mode.
.TP
.BI *
Any other string initiates a new search with original options.
.SH COLORS
\fBDucker\fR allows you to customize the color scheme via a six-letter string, reminiscent of BSD \fBLSCOLORS\fR. The six letters represent the colors of
.IP - 2
indices
.PD 0 \" Change paragraph spacing to 0 in the list
.IP - 2
titles
.IP - 2
URLs
.IP - 2
nothing (may probably be used in a later version)
.IP - 2
abstracts
.IP - 2
prompts
.PD 1 \" Restore paragraph spacing
.TP
respectively. The six-letter string is passed in either as the argument to the \fB--colors\fR option.
.TP
We offer the following colors/styles:
.TS
tab(;) box;
l|l
-|-
l|l.
Letter;Color/Style
a;black
b;red
c;green
d;yellow
e;blue
f;magenta
g;cyan
h;white
i;bright black
j;bright red
k;bright green
l;bright yellow
m;bright blue
n;bright magenta
o;bright cyan
p;bright white
A-H;bold version of the lowercase-letter color
I-P;bold version of the lowercase-letter bright color
x;normal
X;bold
y;reverse video
Y;bold reverse video
.TE
.TP
.TP
The default colors string is \fIGKlgxy\fR, which stands for
.IP - 2
bold bright cyan indices
.PD 0 \" Change paragraph spacing to 0 in the list
.IP - 2
bold bright green titles
.IP - 2
bright yellow URLs
.IP - 2
cyan metadata/publishing info
.IP - 2
normal abstracts
.IP - 2
reverse video prompts
.PD 1 \" Restore paragraph spacing
.TP
Note that
.IP - 2
Bright colors (implemented as \\x1b[90m - \\x1b[97m) may not be available in all color-capable terminal emulators;
.IP - 2
Some terminal emulators draw bold text in bright colors instead;
.IP - 2
Some terminal emulators only distinguish between bold and bright colors via a default-off switch.
.TP
Please consult the manual of your terminal emulator as well as \fIhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code\fR for details.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.IP 1. 4
Search \fBhello world\fR with your default browser in DuckDuckGo HTML version:
.PP
.EX
.IP
.B ducker --no-javascript hello world
.EE
.PP
.IP 2. 4
Search for \fBresults\fR updated within the last \fBmonth\fR for the keywords \fBMetropolis\fR in \fBsite\fR archive.org:
.PP
.EX
.IP
.B ducker -n 4 -t m -w arhive.org Metropolis
.EE
.PP
.IP 3. 4
Open Ducker interactive mode disabling automatic spelling correction:
.PP
.EX
.IP
.B ducker --exact
.EE
.PP
.IP 4. 4
Search for a \fBspecific file type\fR:
.PP
.EX
.IP
.B ducker book type:pdf
.EE
.PP
.IP 5. 4
Use a \fBcustom color scheme\fR, e.g., one warm color scheme designed for Solarized Dark:
.PP
.EX
.IP
.B ducker --colors bjdxxy
.EE
.SH HOME
.I https://www.freakspot.net/programas/ducker
.SH REPORTING BUGS
.I https://notabug.org/Ducker/ducker/issues
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B Ducker
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B Ducker
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info Ducker
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
