# PyDelaunator
Test of implementation of a quad-edge data structure using python.

This little project is here to study quad-edge structure
for further developments of [Delaunator](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/delaunator),
which waits since a long time.

There is a small GUI (done with the awesome [pyglet](http://pyglet.org) module)
that allow one to play with the triangulation.


## Installation/requirements
Installation in one command, including dependancies:

    pip install pydelaunator


## Usage
The package run the GUI if launched directly:

    python -m pydelaunator
    
Use `--help` for options.

The higher-level API is the [Placer object](pydelaunator/placer.py). See [tests](pydelaunator/test/test_placer.py) for other usage examples.

## Notes
### Goals
This work is mainly here to prototype a better API and detect where
and why are bugs in Delaunator.

Efficiency is not a primarily goal, altough, since interfacing python with
other languages is a fun exercise, i probably will try some optimizations related to C.
Similarly, some algorithms ideas could be easily tested here.

Therefore, PyDelaunator is also a playground for further researchs.

### Computational geometry
[Codes used there](pydelaunator/geometry.py) are mainly constitued from online ressources (SO, wikipedia).
They are *not* toroughly [tested](pydelaunator/test/test_geometry.py), but as far as the triangulation works.

Implementating them in C could probably speed them up a little,
since in python arithmetic codes tends to be costly.

### Duality Vertex/data
Maybe not the most optimized, but a mapping object/vertex with a dict
is certainly the less invasive for end-user, [as implemented in the Placer object](pydelaunator/placer.py).

Other ways to go:

- client objects inheriting from Vertex
- client objects keeping a reference to their vertex

These two ways are probably far more efficient in case of big data.
However, if current API *allow* these, Placer object continue to track objects using the dict mapping.
Modification of the Placer is needed, or an alternative implementation.
