Contributing to the Thespian Project
====================================

Summary:
--------

Thank you for your interest in the Thespian Project, a GoDaddy.com,
LLC (“Company”) open source project. In order to clarify the
intellectual property license granted with Contributions from any
person or entity, the Company must have a Contributor License
Agreement ("CLA") on file that has been acknowledged by each
Contributor, indicating agreement to the license terms below. This
license is for your protection as a Contributor as well as the
protection of the Company and its users; it does not change your
rights to use your own Contributions for any other purpose. This CLA
allows an individual or an entity to submit Contributions to the
Company, to authorize Contributions submitted by its designated
employees to the Company, and to grant copyright and patent licenses
and other rights with respect thereto.

CLA’s are important because they define the chain of ownership of a
piece of software. Some companies won't allow the use of free software
without clear agreements around code ownership. That's why many open
source projects collect similar agreements from contributors.

Please read this document carefully before signing and keep a copy for
your records. If you have questions about these terms, or if you
cannot submit an electronic copy, please contact us at
oss@godaddy.com.

Thespian Project Release.
-------------------------

Thespian Project’s releases (code, documentation, and any other
materials) are each published under the terms of the individual
licenses as noted in the project's repository, or, if no separate
license is specified, under the terms of the MIT license.

Thespian Project Contributor License Agreement (“Agreement”) V1.0
-----------------------------------------------------------------

You accept and agree to the following terms and conditions for Your
present and future Contributions submitted to Thespian. Except for the
license granted herein to Thespian and recipients of software
distributed by Thespian, You reserve all right, title, and interest in
and to Your Contributions.

1. Definitions.

1.1. "You" (or "Your") shall mean the copyright owner or legal entity
authorized by the copyright owner that is making this Agreement with
Company. For legal entities, the entity making a Contribution and all
other entities that control, are controlled by, or are under common
control with that entity are considered to be a single
Contributor. For the purposes of this definition, "control" means (i)
the power, direct or indirect, to cause the direction or management of
such entity, whether by contract or otherwise, or (ii) ownership of
fifty percent (50%) or more of the outstanding shares, or (iii)
beneficial ownership of such entity.

1.2. "Contribution" shall mean any original work of authorship,
including any modifications or additions to an existing work, that is
intentionally submitted by You to Company for inclusion in, or
documentation of, any of the products owned or managed by Company (the
"Work"). For the purposes of this definition, "submitted" means any
form of electronic, verbal, or written communication sent to Company
or its representatives, including but not limited to communication on
electronic mailing lists, source code control systems, and issue
tracking systems that are managed by, or on behalf of, Company for the
purpose of discussing and improving the Work, but excluding
communication that is conspicuously marked or otherwise designated in
writing by You as "Not a Contribution."

2. Grant of Copyright License.

Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, You hereby
grant to Company and to recipients of software distributed by Company
a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free,
irrevocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare derivative works
of, publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute
Your Contributions and such derivative works.

3. Grant of Patent License.

Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, You hereby
grant to Company and to recipients of software distributed by Company
a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free,
irrevocable (except as stated in this section) patent license to make,
have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer
the Work, where such license applies only to those patent claims
licensable by You that are necessarily infringed by Your
Contribution(s) alone or by combination of Your Contribution(s) with
the Work to which such Contribution(s) was submitted. If any entity
institutes patent litigation against You or any other entity
(including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that
your Contribution, or the Work to which you have contributed,
constitutes direct or contributory patent infringement, then any
patent licenses granted to that entity under this Agreement for that
Contribution or Work shall terminate as of the date such litigation is
filed.

4. Representations. 

4.1. You represent that you are legally entitled to grant the above
license. If your employer(s) has rights to intellectual property that
you create that includes your Contributions, you represent that you
have received permission to make Contributions on behalf of that
employer, that your employer has waived such rights for your
Contributions to Company.

4.2. You represent that each of Your Contributions is Your original
creation (see section 5 for submissions on behalf of others). You
represent that Your Contribution submissions include complete details
of any third-party license or any other restriction (including, but
not limited to, related patents and trademarks, whether such patents
or trademarks are Yours, Your employer’s or any other party’s) of
which you are personally aware and which are associated with any part
of Your Contributions.

4.3. You are not expected to provide support for Your Contributions,
except to the extent You desire to provide support. You may provide
support for free, for a fee, or not at all. Unless required by
applicable law or agreed in writing, You provide Your Contributions on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either
express or implied, including, without limitation, any warranties or
conditions of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

5. Submitting on behalf of a third party.

Should You wish to submit work that is not Your original creation, You
may submit it to Company separately from any Contribution, identifying
the complete details of its source and of any license or other
restriction (including, but not limited to, related patents,
trademarks, and license agreements) of which you are personally aware,
and conspicuously marking the work as "Submitted on behalf of a
third-party: [named here]".

6. Miscellaneous. 

6.1. You agree to notify Company of any facts or circumstances of
which you become aware that would make these representations
inaccurate in any respect.

6.2. The validity and interpretation of this Agreement shall be
governed by, and construed and enforced in accordance with, the laws
of the State of Arizona applicable to agreements made there (excluding
the conflicts of laws rules).  You agree to and consent to the
exclusive jurisdiction of the federal or state courts of Arizona.

6.3. This Agreement embodies the entire agreement and understanding of
the parties hereto and supersedes any and all prior agreements,
arrangements and understandings relating to the matters provided for
herein. No alteration, waiver, amendment, change or supplement hereto
shall be binding or effective unless the same is set forth in writing
signed by both parties.

[This Agreement is derived from The Apache Software Foundation’s
Individual Contributor License Agreement V2.0. Neither the Company nor
the Thespian Project are associated with The Apache Software
Foundation.]
